---
layout: course
semester: Fall 2022
termcode: 222
termletter: "a"
number: Math 162
title: "Calculus II"
institution: "Lafayette College"
---

## Introduction
Welcome to Calculus II! This syllabus is meant to introduce you to both the structure and motivation for this course. Please take a close look and be sure to have it easily accessible during the semester. I'm looking forward to working with you!

#### Overview
In a first course on calculus, we usually focus on derivatives, integrals, and the relationships between them. Among the key lessons is that differentiation is significantly more straightforward than integration; in particular, the definition of an integral requires us to evaluate the limit of a Riemann sum, which can be very difficult! This immediately prompts two questions:

1. What techniques can we develop for evaluating integrals?
2. Are there other uses for this "limit of a sum" idea?

This course focuses on answering these questions and exploring the applications that come from those techniques. Some of the topics we will investigate include integration techniques, applications of integration to geometry and physics, convergence of sequences and series, Taylor approximation, and a brief introduction to differential equations.

#### Course Objectives
- Master techniques and applications for integration
- Improve geometric intuition in two and three dimensions
- Develop a conceptual and practical understanding of sequences and series
- Practice and improve mathematical communication and collaboration skills
- Discuss connections between the theory of calculus and its applications in the real world

#### Learning Outcomes
After completing this course, students will be able to:
- Identify relevant calculus techniques to use in real-world problems
- Use a variety of techniques to solve definite integrals and determine the convergence of sequences and series
- Solve ordinary differential equations using Euler's method and separation of variables
- Illustrate calculus principles using two- and three-dimensional graphs
- Interpret and explain calculus concepts to their peers

#### Administrative Information
- Classroom: Pardee 217
- My office: Pardee 229
- Office Hours: M 11am-12pm, T 2-4pm, F 10-11am
- Email: doughemj@lafayette.edu
- Course website: [https://moodle.lafayette.edu/course/view.php?id=23395](https://moodle.lafayette.edu/course/view.php?id=23395)

#### Textbook
*Calculus, 9th Edition* by Stewart, Clegg, and Watson

## Course Components
Here, I've described some of the structure for our course. Take a look to see what you can expect throughout the semester.

#### Active Learning
In this course, we place a heavy emphasis on the value of in-class group learning. While there will still be some amount of traditional lecturing, you should expect to spend the majority of each class period learning collaboratively with your peers. While the work you complete in class will not be graded on its correctness, you will still receive a grade based on your effort to collaborate with your classmaters.

#### Office Hours
For a few hours each week, I will be available to chat about the course in my office (Pardee 229). While it is often helpful to come with a specific concept or question you'd like to discuss, I'm also happy to just chat about how things are going. You do not need to request time for my scheduled office hours - you can just drop by! If you cannot make it to my scheduled hours but want to chat, let me know and I will do my best to find a time when we can meet.

#### Homework
We will have weekly homework assignments in two parts: one to be completed online via WeBWorK, and another to be written by hand (or typed) and submitted via Gradescope. Details for accessing the homework will be available on Moodle. The purpose of these assignments is to help you both practice what you learn in class and expand that knowledge. You are highly encouraged to work with your peers, but keep in mind the point of the assignment: to help you learn!

#### Projects
Throughout the semester, you will complete a few projects on the course material. Some projects will involve groupwork (beginning in class and finished outside of class) and others will be done individually. In each project, you will be graded on the quality of writing as well as correctness. More information on the projects will be announced as we approach them.

#### Exams
This course includes both a midterm exam and a cumulative final exam. At the moment, I am planning on both exams being held in-person. The midterm is tentatively scheduled for Monday, October 3 during our usual class time, although this is subject to change.

#### Grading
The graded work in this course includes homework, in-class participation, a midterm exam, projects, and a final exam. These categories combine to form your final grade according to the following breakdown:

- In-class group work: 10%
- Homework (online): 15%
- Homework (written): 10%
- Projects: 15%
- Midterm: 20%
- Final: 30%

## Policies and Resources
No syllabus would be complete without the fine print! These sections are important, though - please be sure to familiarize yourself with it and keep an eye out for resources which may be helpful to you.

#### Covid Precautions
In an effort to ensure everyone's safety, mask-wearing is required in class and during office hours. Please be sure to bring a well-fitting mask which covers your nose and mouth. We may revise this policy later in the semester, depending on how the covid situation evolves.

#### Diversity and Inclusion
We value diversity and inclusion, and are committed to a climate of mutual respect and full participation both in and out of the classroom. This class strives to be a learning environment that is equitable, inclusive, and welcoming, regardless of race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, socioeconomic background, and nationality. If you anticipate or experience any barriers to learning, please don't hesitate to discuss your concerns with me.

#### Etiquette
Discussing mathematics can often be difficult - it takes practice! Please work hard to be considerate and respectful when talking to your classmates. Remember that we are not just machines for solving math problems. We are humans as well!

#### Disability Resources
Lafayette is committed to providing support and reasonable accommodations for students with disabilities who self-identify with Accessibility Services. Students requesting accommodations to alleviate the impact of their disability should register their needs as soon as possible with the Accessibility Services Office, which is housed in the Academic Resource Hub (resourcehub@lafayette.edu). Once registered, students should request their accommodation letters to provide notification of their needs to their professors, on a semester by semester basis. If you have questions or concerns pertaining specifically to your accommodations within this course, please contact me to discuss them.

#### Religious Observations
If you anticipate that you will have an unavoidable course conflict due to a religious observation, please meet with me as soon as possible so that we can make appropriate arrangements.

#### Academic Honesty
While working collaboratively on homework is (strongly) encouraged, the submission of work which is not your own is strictly prohibited. This includes (but is not limited to) copying answers from peers or the internet. Explicitly, you may discuss assignments together, but your written work must be your own. When you do work with someone else or get help from an outside source, please cite it accordingly.

#### Federal Credit Hour Compliance
The student work in this course is in full compliance with the federal definition of a four credit hour course. Please see the Lafayette College Compliance webpage ([http://registrar.lafayette.edu/additional-resources/cep-course-proposal/](http://registrar.lafayette.edu/additional-resources/cep-course-proposal/)) for the full policy and practice statement.
